---
layout: post
title: Freeware vs Payware&#58; pick the product that best meets your needs
author: jabenninghoff
comments: true
---
Is Open Source software more secure or less secure than Closed Source
software? Usually, when people ask or answer this question, they are
comparing free, open source software that is developed by a team of
mostly volunteer collaborators against commercial software developed by
for-profit companies; I will use the terms Open Source and Commercial to
distinguish the two.

The relative security of open source and commercial software was a topic
of considerable
[debate](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_source_software_security)
within the security community starting in 1999-2000. The proponents of
open source software typically claimed that their software was more
secure because it was free to be reviewed by anyone on the internet;
volunteer security researchers and programmers could find and fix
security problems better than traditional software publishers could. The
commercial software publishers more or less argued the reverse; that
criminals would find and take advantage of security flaws in open source
software because it was freely available. By
[2004](https://scholar.google.com/scholar?rlz=1C1GGLS_en___US364&sourceid=chrome&q=open%20source%20software%20security&um=1&ie=UTF-8&sa=N&hl=en&tab=ws),
however, the debate was generally settled within the security community,
and neither side won.

What security professionals found, was that there were security
advantages and disadvantages of both open source (free) software and
commercial (closed source) software. Starting in
[2001](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Notable_computer_viruses_and_worms#2001)
with the release of the "[Code
Red](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Code_Red_(computer_worm))" worm,
vandals, and later, criminals, began to take advantage of security flaws
in both commercial software and open source software on a large scale.
Looking at the attacks since 2001, it's clear that there are advantages
to both open source and commercial software, but what's most important
is how we manage the risk of software vulnerabilities. In general, open
source software has more vulnerabilities made public, because they are
easier to find, but they are typically patched more quickly, since the
development process allows for faster changes. Commercial software has
fewer public vulnerabilities, but it can take much longer for fixes to
be developed and released. For both open source and commercial software,
the best thing you can do to protect against attacks is to quickly
deploy software fixes when they are released. Proper configuration &
maintenance has proven more important to security than how the software
is developed.

In almost all cases, security fixes for both commercial and open source
software are released before criminals start taking advantage of the
flaws they fix. Good security practices that reduce the impact of
security flaws, and good maintenance practices that deploy fixes quickly
provide the best protection against attack.
"[Zero-day](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zero_day_attack)" attacks,
named because they happen '0 days' after the vulnerability is
discovered, and before the flaw can be fixed, are still uncommon, and
affect both open source & commercial software. The biggest factor in
0-day attacks seems to be the number of people using the software,
without regard to how it is developed. (This does tend to favor open
source software, but only because it is usually not in widespread use)
And if you have good general security, there's not much more you can do
to protect against a 0-day attack.

Publishers can improve their software development to reduce how
frequently flaws are found, and also make it less likely attackers can
take advantage of the flaws, but these practices are well known and can
be used by both commercial and open source projects.
[OpenBSD](https://www.openbsd.org/), a free UNIX operating system, has
followed strict development and design standards for many years, and as
a result has had very few flaws. Microsoft started the [Security
Development
Lifecycle](http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/security/default.aspx) in
2004, and largely as a result, the number of flaws in Vista, and now
Windows 7 has steadily declined.

What's really important is to buy the product you need. Unless you're
buying a security product, like a firewall, you're buying something to
meet a business need; security is only a secondary concern. I was
recently asked if there are any security showstoppers when purchasing
software. My response was, "no, not really, unless they do something
stupid." When comparing products, some will have better security than
others, but most of the time, security weaknesses aren't bad enough to
stand in the way of picking the best product, and usually, better
products have better security. The best way to make sure you understand
products' security weaknesses is to ask a security expert before you
purchase, so you know the security costs for both installing and
maintaining the system.

After you've purchased the product, spend time to understand & configure
the security features of what you've bought, following the advice of
your security expert, unless what they tell you would prevent you from
using the product -- in that case, find a new expert. Ongoing
maintenance is just as critical, if not more so. Be sure to commit time
for applying critical updates, including receiving update notifications,
as well as any security administration. Configuration errors or missing
patches affect all software, and good maintenance practices will prevent
both.

If you outsource part or all of your IT, the decision remains the same.
When you're hiring a vendor to provide and support an application or
other technology, it's most important to find the vendor that best meets
your business needs and practices. As with products, usually better
vendors have better security, and good vendor management practices will
also mean better security. Setting clear expectations of your
businesses' security requirements and due diligence are key, as, after
all, security requirements are really just a specific type of business
requirement. For software security, whether your vendor chooses open
source or commercial packages, the question remains the same: how well
does your vendor maintain the software? Are they monitoring for and
regularly applying security updates? Are they configuring the software
properly? Again, have your security expert review the vendor's security
program, and if they don't meet your standards, find a new vendor.

For both open source and commercial software, the key to success is
proper configuration and maintenance, and proper system management, or
vendor management will keep your applications and systems secure.
