---
layout: post
title: Behavioral Security Modeling&#58; Functional Security Requirements
author: jabenninghoff
comments: false
---
In my [Behavioral Security Modeling]({% post_url 2011-09-26-bsm-presentation %}) talk at [OWASP AppSec USA 2011]({% post_url 2011-11-17-appsec-usa-2011-video %}), I promised a white paper on BSM.
Since then, I enlisted the aid of Karl Brophey, a friend who has a
wealth of experience in software development and architecture, and the
result of our collaboration is finally complete! I'm pleased to formally
announce the release of the first BSM white paper, "Behavioral Security
Modeling: Functional Security Requirements." Karl and I will be
[speaking about the paper](https://web.archive.org/web/20120608025300/http://secure360.org/attendees/workshop-descriptions/#BSM)
today at [Secure360](https://web.archive.org/web/20120522034518/http://secure360.org/) in St Paul. Hope to see you
there!

**Abstract:**

*Defining functional security requirements is a key component of
Behavioral Security Modeling, a method to improve security through
accurately modeling human/information interactions in social terms. The
paper proposes a practical, SDLC agnostic method for gathering
functional security requirements by establishing limits on interactions
through a series of questions to identify, clarify, and uncover hidden
constraints. Five categories of constraints are presented, along with
advice and "requirement patterns" to facilitate discussions with
stakeholders and translate business needs into unambiguous security
requirements. General advice on improving constraints, implementation
considerations, security actions, quality assurance, and documenting
post conditions are also discussed.*

*Version 1.0 disclaimer: this white paper attempts to formally capture
our collective knowledge on how to effectively define functional
security requirements. The next step is to test the theory by
implementing the approach in a number of application development
environments.*

**Paper:**

[Behavioral Security Modeling: Functional Security Requirements](/assets/bsm-functional-security-requirements.pdf)
