---
layout: post
title: On Money Mules and Credential Theft
author: jabenninghoff
comments: false
---
A threatpost article, "[Money Mules, Not Customers, The Real Victims of
Bank Fraud](https://web.archive.org/web/20130225095457/http://threatpost.com/en_us/blogs/money-mules-not-customers-real-victims-bank-fraud-032712)"
and [the paper it references](https://web.archive.org/web/20151031113601/http://research.microsoft.com/apps/pubs/?id=161829) caught
my attention today. The premise of the paper is that due to banking
regulations and how banks react to fraudulent online transactions
affecting consumer accounts, the criminals are effectively stealing not
from consumers, but from the "money mules" they recruit to move the
stolen money. Brian Krebs, a journalist and blogger who writes about the
online criminal underground and information security issues on his blog,
[Krebs on Security](http://krebsonsecurity.com/), posted a comment
criticizing the authors' conclusions, specifically calling out that the
main victims of theft of banking credentials are small and mid-size
business owners, who *are* liable for losses, and have lost significant
amounts of money. I've reposted my reply in part below. I largely agree
with Brian, however, I do think the authors raise good points about the
difficulty of moving money through the banking system, and about the
critical role mules play in online bank fraud.

*@Brian,*

*Your point on the fraud losses to small and mid-size business owners
with corporate banking accounts is spot-on, and while the paper makes it
clear they are mainly addressing the consumer problem, it's a fair
criticism that they're glossing over a significant portion of online
banking fraud, and that they misrepresent the facts by citing the
instances in which fraudulent transactions on commercial accounts and
not the transactions that couldn't be reversed.*

*However, I do believe the paper raises an excellent point about online
consumer banking fraud, and online banking fraud in general. It is
difficult to transfer money out of accounts, and the mules really do
bear much of the risk, and (as you have noted) rarely get paid, and
sometimes may not realize what they're doing is illegal. Their point on
the low black market value of stolen credentials relative to account
value does indicate that extracting money is difficult, and unlikely to
succeed. Even though their rationale on how banks resolve fraudulent
transfers means that attackers are effectively stealing from the mules
only applies to consumers, I welcome the suggestion that we attack the
problem at other points in the chain, and not just passwords. We may do
better to disrupt online banking fraud by putting more efforts into
making mule recruitment harder.*

*I would also raise a point not yet covered in the article or the
comments: I take issue with the authors' comments on liability; the auto
rental and identity theft insurance markets have little bearing on
banks' decision to offer zero-dollar liability; the reality is, when the
consumers' liability is limited by regulation to \$50, offering the
extra \$50 is trivially inexpensive. When Banks aren't legally obligated
to bear liability, they quite willingly shift it to the account holder,
as is the case for US commercial bank accounts. I for one would very
much like to see regulators force the issue and limit liability for at
least small and mid-size business, since they're simply not equipped to
handle this type of fraud on their own.*
