---
layout: post
title: AppSec USA 2012&#58; Functional Security Requirements using Behavioral Security Modeling
author: jabenninghoff
comments: false
---
**Copyright © 2012 Brophey Consulting and Transvasive Security. All rights reserved.**

I spoke today at OWASP [AppSec USA](http://2012.appsecusa.org/) on
["Building Predictable Systems using Behavioral Security Modeling:
Functional Security
Requirements".](https://web.archive.org/web/20121029075040if_/http://appsecusa2012.sched.org/event/a3576d789eeb8449ecc84d1338cc3f19)
Although Karl Brophey was not able to join me, he was there in spirit.
The talk was an updated version of [our presentation at
Secure360](URL) earlier this year.

Here is [a copy of the slides from the talk](/assets/bsm-fsr-appsec-20121025.pdf). OWASP
will be posting a free video as well (thanks!) and I'll add a link when
that becomes available. Below is a the abstract and link to the white
paper we wrote, which explains the ideas presented in the talk in
greater detail.

**Abstract:**

*Defining functional security requirements is a key component of
Behavioral Security Modeling, a method to improve security through
accurately modeling human/information interactions in social terms. The
paper proposes a practical, SDLC agnostic method for gathering
functional security requirements by establishing limits on interactions
through a series of questions to identify, clarify, and uncover hidden
constraints. Five categories of constraints are presented, along with
advice and "requirement patterns" to facilitate discussions with
stakeholders and translate business needs into unambiguous security
requirements. General advice on improving constraints, implementation
considerations, security actions, quality assurance, and documenting
post conditions are also discussed.*

**Paper:**

[Behavioral Security Modeling: Functional Security Requirements](/assets/bsm-functional-security-requirements.pdf)
